in int main return 0; mean that the program in successfully ended and also mean false, and return 1; also , and in bool they both are false and true, why this, when is it considering what i am not able to understand , explain me in detail and to the point from first principles thinking.


Let's break down the concept of return values in C++ and how they relate to boolean values.

Return Values in C++

In C++, when a function completes its execution, it can return a value to the caller using the return statement. The return value is used to indicate the outcome of the function's execution. In the case of the main function, the return value is used to indicate the program's exit status.

Exit Status

The exit status of a program is a value that indicates whether the program executed successfully or not. In C++, the exit status is represented by an integer value, where:

0 typically indicates successful execution (i.e., the program completed without errors)
Non-zero values typically indicate an error or abnormal termination
When a program returns 0, it means that the program executed successfully, and the operating system can assume that the program completed its task without errors.

Boolean Values

In C++, boolean values are represented using the bool data type, which can have one of two values:

true (represented as 1)
false (represented as 0)
Boolean values are used to represent logical conditions, such as the result of a comparison or a conditional statement.

Relationship between Return Values and Boolean Values

Now, let's explore the relationship between return values and boolean values.

In C++, when a function returns a boolean value, it is equivalent to returning an integer value, where:

true is equivalent to 1
false is equivalent to 0
This means that when a function returns a boolean value, it can be treated as an integer value. For example:

bool isValid = true;
int result = isValid;  // result is assigned the value 1

Conversely, when a function returns an integer value, it can be treated as a boolean value. For example:

int result = 1;
bool isValid = result;  // isValid is assigned the value true

Why return 0 means success and return 1 means failure

The convention of using 0 to indicate success and non-zero values to indicate failure dates back to the early days of computing. The reason for this convention is largely historical and based on the way operating systems and programming languages evolved.

In the early days of computing, many systems used a single bit to indicate the outcome of a program's execution. A 0 in this bit indicated success, while a 1 indicated failure. This convention was adopted by many programming languages, including C and C++.

Over time, the convention was extended to use multiple bits to represent the exit status, but the basic idea remained the same: 0 indicates success, and non-zero values indicate failure.

In conclusion

In summary, the return value of a function in C++ is used to indicate the outcome of the function's execution. In the case of the main function, a return value of 0 indicates successful execution, while non-zero values indicate an error or abnormal termination.

Boolean values, on the other hand, are used to represent logical conditions and can be treated as integer values, where true is equivalent to 1 and false is equivalent to 0.

The convention of using 0 to indicate success and non-zero values to indicate failure is a historical artifact that has been adopted by many programming languages, including C and C++.